OSDOCS#12348: Migrating etcd overview docs to new etcd book (#93384)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/understand-etcd-performance.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// etcd/etcd-overview.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="understand-etcd-performance_{context}"]
= Understanding etcd performance

As a consistent distributed key-value store operating as a cluster of replicated nodes, etcd follows the Raft algorithm by electing one node as the leader and the others as followers. The leader maintains the system's current state and ensures that the followers are up-to-date.

The leader node is responsible for log replication. It handles incoming write transactions from the client and writes a Raft log entry that it then broadcasts to the followers. 

When an etcd client such as `kube-apiserver` connects to an etcd member that is requesting an action that requires a quorum, such as writing a value, if the etcd member is a follower, it returns a message indicating that the transaction should go to the leader. 

> When the etcd client requests an action that requires a quorum, such as writing a value, from the leader, the leader maintains the client connection open while it writes the local Raft log, broadcasts the log to the followers, and waits for the majority of the followers to acknowledge to have committed the log without failures. The leader sends the acknowledgment to the etcd client and closes the session. If failure notifications are received from the clients and fail to reach a consensus, the leader returns the error message to the client and closes the session.

Reviewer: I think we mean followers here, not clients.
```suggestion
When the etcd client requests an action that requires a quorum, such as writing a value, from the leader, the leader maintains the client connection open while it writes the local Raft log, broadcasts the log to the followers, and waits for the majority of the followers to acknowledge to have committed the log without failures. The leader sends the acknowledgment to the etcd client and closes the session. If failure notifications are received from the followers and fail to reach a consensus, the leader returns the error message to the client and closes the session.
```

.{product-title} timer conditions for etcd

{product-title} maintains etcd timers that are optimized for each platform. {product-title} has prescribed validated values that are optimized for each platform provider. The default `etcd timers` with `platform=none` or `platform=metal` are as follows:

[source,yaml]
----
- name: ETCD_ELECTION_TIMEOUT <1>
  value: "1000"
  ...
- name: ETCD_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL <2>
  value: "100" 
----

<1> This timeout is how long a follower node will go without hearing a heartbeat before it attempts to become the leader.
<2> The frequency that the leader notifies followers that it is still the leader.

These parameters do not provide all of the information for the control plane or for etcd. An etcd cluster is sensitive to disk latencies. Because etcd must persist proposals to its log, disk activity from other processes might cause long `fsync` latencies. The consequence is that etcd might miss heartbeats, causing request timeouts and temporary leader loss. During a leader loss and reelection, the Kubernetes API cannot process any request that causes a service-affecting event and instability of the cluster.

.Effects of disk latency on etcd

> An etcd cluster is sensitive to disk latencies. To understand the disk latency that is experienced by etcd in your control plane environment, run the Flexible I/O Tester (fio) tests or suite, to check etcd disk performance in {product-title}.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Maybe a quick note on the fact that `fio` is a point in time test that only tells whether the disk latency was fast enough at the time `fio` is executed and does not account for long term disk behaviour and other disk workloads that will be present alongside etcd in a real scenario.

It's mentioned in the KCS but maybe worth surfacing here as a quick mention.
https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4885641

But if that's too much info for an overview then we can skip it.

Author: @hasbro17  I added an important note here.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// etcd/etcd-overview.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="understand-etcd-performance_{context}"]
= Understanding etcd performance

As a consistent distributed key-value store operating as a cluster of replicated nodes, etcd follows the Raft algorithm by electing one node as the leader and the others as followers. The leader maintains the system's current state and ensures that the followers are up-to-date.

The leader node is responsible for log replication. It handles incoming write transactions from the client and writes a Raft log entry that it then broadcasts to the followers. 

> When an etcd client such as `kube-apiserver` connects to an etcd member that is requesting an action that requires a quorum, such as writing a value, if the etcd member is a follower, it returns a message indicating that the transaction should go to the leader. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an etcd client such as `kube-apiserver` connects to an etcd member that is requesting an action that requires a quorum, such as writing a value, if the etcd member is a follower, it returns a message indicating that the transaction needs to go to the leader. 
```
Avoiding "should", per ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#should

====

Ensure that the final report classifies the disk as appropriate for etcd, as shown in the following example:

[source,text]
----
...
99th percentile of fsync is 5865472 ns
99th percentile of the fsync is within the suggested threshold: - 20 ms, the disk can be used to host etcd
----

When a high latency disk is used, a message states that the disk is not suggested for etcd, as shown in the following example:

[source,text]
----
...
99th percentile of fsync is 15865472 ns
99th percentile of the fsync is greater than the suggested value which is 20 ms, faster disks are suggested to host etcd for better performance
----

When you use cluster deployments that span many data centers that are using disks for etcd that do not meet the suggested latency, it increases the chances of service-affecting failures and dramatically reduces the network latency that the control plane can sustain.

.Effects of network latency and jitter on etcd

Use the tools that are described in the maximum transmission unit (MTU) discovery and validation section to obtain the average and maximum network latency.

> The value of the heartbeat interval should be around the maximum of the average round-trip time (RTT) between members, normally around 1.5x the round-trip time. With the {product-title} default heartbeat interval of 100ms, the suggested RTT between control plane nodes is less than 33 ms with a maximum of less than 66 ms (66 ms x 1.5 = 99 ms). Any network latency that is larger might cause service-affecting events and cluster instability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value of the heartbeat interval should be approximately the maximum of the average round-trip time (RTT) between members, normally around 1.5 times the round-trip time. With the {product-title} default heartbeat interval of 100 ms, the suggested RTT between control plane nodes is less than 33 ms, with a maximum of less than 66 ms (66 ms x 1.5 = 99 ms). Any network latency that is larger might cause service-affecting events and cluster instability.
```
ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=punctuation-symbols#individual-punctuation-marks-or-special-characters

The network latency is determined by factors that include the technology of the transport networks, such as copper, fiber, wireless, or satellite, the number and quality of the network devices in the transport network, and other factors. 

> Consider network latency with network jitter for exact calculations. Network jitter is the variance in network latency or the variation in the delay of received packets. In efficient network conditions, the jitter should be zero. Network jitter affects the network latency calculations for etcd because the actual network latency over time will be the RTT plus or minus Jitter. For example, a network with a maximum latency of 80 ms and jitter of 30 ms will experience latencies of 110 ms, which means etcd will miss heartbeats. This condition results in request timeouts and temporary leader loss. During a leader loss and re-election, the Kubernetes API cannot process any request that causes a service-affecting event and instability of the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider network latency with network jitter for exact calculations. _Network jitter_ is the variance in network latency or the variation in the delay of received packets. In efficient network conditions, the jitter should be zero. Network jitter affects the network latency calculations for etcd because the actual network latency over time will be the RTT plus or minus Jitter.

For example, a network with a maximum latency of 80 ms and jitter of 30 ms will experience latencies of 110 ms, which means etcd will miss heartbeats. This condition results in request timeouts and temporary leader loss. During a leader loss and re-election, the Kubernetes API cannot process any request that causes a service-affecting event and instability of the cluster.
```
- Formatting the term "Network jitter" in italics because you are defining it here.
- Breaking the paragraph in two for easier readability.

> .Effects of consensus latency on etcd

Reviewer 2: See comment about discrete headings.

> The procedure can run only on an active cluster. The disk or network test should be completed while you plan a cluster deployment. That test validates and monitors cluster health after a deployment.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure which procedure you're referring to here.

By using the `etcdctl` CLI, you can watch the latency for reaching consensus as experienced by etcd. You must identify one of the etcd pods and then retrieve the endpoint health.

> .etcd peer round trip time impacts on performance

Reviewer 2: See comment about discrete headings.

> The etcd peer round trip time is not the same as the network round trip time. This calculation is an end-to-end test metric about how quickly  replication can occur among members.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The etcd peer round trip time is not the same as the network round trip time. This calculation is an end-to-end test metric about how quickly replication can occur among members.
```

The etcd peer round trip time is the metric that shows the latency of etcd to finish replicating a client request among all the etcd members.

> The {product-title} console provides dashboards to visualize the various etcd metrics. From the console, select *Observe* then *Dashboards*. Select `etcd` from the dropdown list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {product-title} console provides dashboards to visualize the various etcd metrics. In the console, click *Observe* -> *Dashboards*. From the dropdown list, select *etcd*.
```
OCP docs guidelines: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=punctuation-symbols#individual-punctuation-marks-or-special-characters

Author: @lahinson Should the navigation be: *Observe* > *Dashboards* according to this [page](https://spaces.redhat.com/display/contentservices/UI+guidelines%3A+quick+reference)?
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c8cac2df-42bd-45e4-b822-ef368c3978d3)

Reviewer 2: @tmalove Good question! According to that page, the SSG supersedes IBM Style, and I believe the [OCP docs guide](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc) supercedes the SSG. The OCP docs guidelines say to use `->`. The UI elements table that you've referenced is from IBM Style, so I think `->` is preferred in OCP docs over `>`.

A plot that summarizes the etcd peer round trip time is near the end of the etcd *Dashboard* page. 

> .Effects of database size on etcd

Reviewer 2: See comment about discrete headings.

Minimal options exist for controlling the size of the etcd database, because it depends on the Operators and applications in the system. When you consider the latency range where the system operates, account for the effects of synchronization or defragmentation per size of the etcd database.

The magnitude of the effects is specific to the deployment. The time to complete a defragmentation will cause degradation in the transaction rate, as the etcd member cannot accept updates during the defragmentation process. Similarly, the time for the etcd re-synchronization for large databases with high change rate affects the transaction rate and transaction latency on the system. Consider the following two examples for the type of impacts to plan for.

The first example of the effect of etcd defragmentation based on database size is that writing an etcd database of 1 GB to a slow 7200 RPMs disk at 80 Mb per second takes about 1 minute and 40 seconds. In such a scenario, the defragmentation process takes at least this long, to complete the defragmentation.

> The second example of the effect of database size on etcd synchronization is that if there is a change of 10% of the etcd database during disconnection of one of the control plane nodes, the sync needs to transfer at least 100 MB. Transferring 100 MB over a 1 Gbps link takes 800 ms. On clusters with regular transactions with the Kubernetes API, the larger the etcd database size, the more network instabilities will cause control plane instabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second example of the effect of database size on etcd synchronization is that if there is a change of 10% of the etcd database during disconnection of one of the control plane nodes, the sync needs to transfer at least 100 MB. Transferring 100 MB over a 1 Gbps link takes 800 ms. On clusters with regular transactions with the Kubernetes API, the larger the etcd database size, the more network instabilities can cause control plane instabilities.
```
Trying to avoid future tense here.

> In {product-title}, the etcd dashboard has a plot that reports the size of the etcd database, or you can obtain it from the CLI by using the `etcdctl` tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In {product-title}, the etcd dashboard has a plot that reports the size of the etcd database. Alternatively, you can obtain the database size from the CLI by using the `etcdctl` tool.
```

[source,text]
----
# oc get pods -n openshift-etcd -l app=etcd
NAME      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
etcd-m0   4/4     Running   4          22h
etcd-m1   4/4     Running   4          22h
etcd-m2   4/4     Running   4          22h

# oc exec -t etcd-m0 -- etcdctl endpoint status -w simple | cut -d, -f 1,3,4
https://198.18.111.12:2379, 3.5.6, 1.1 GB
https://198.18.111.13:2379, 3.5.6, 1.1 GB
https://198.18.111.14:2379, 3.5.6, 1.1 GB
----

> .Effects of the Kubernetes API transaction rate on etcd

Reviewer 2: See comment about discrete headings.

> The Kubernetes API transaction rate that is possible when you are using stretched control plane is dependent on the characteristics of the particular deployment. It depends on the combination of the etcd disk latency, the etcd round trip time, and the size of objects that are written to the API. As a result, when you use stretched control planes, the cluster administrators should test the environment to determine the sustained transaction rate that is possible for their environment. The `kube-burner` tool can be used for this purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you are using a stretched control plane, the Kubernetes API transaction rate depends on the characteristics of the particular deployment. It depends on the combination of the etcd disk latency, the etcd round trip time, and the size of objects that are written to the API. As a result, when you use stretched control planes, the cluster administrators need to test the environment to determine the sustained transaction rate that is possible for their environment. The `kube-burner` tool can be used for this purpose.
```

> .Determining Kubernetes API transaction rate for your environment

Reviewer 2: See comment about discrete headings
